Governing Force in AGI: Architectural Constraints for Bounded Defensive Capability

Jeremy K. | Project-AI | Zenodo Preprint Series
Salt Lake City, Utah | 2026

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

ABSTRACT

The prevailing discourse surrounding artificial intelligence safety assumes that harm
can be mitigated through restriction or avoidance of dangerous concepts—particularly
violence. This paper challenges that assumption as structurally insufficient. Human
civilization is not a controlled laboratory; it is an adversarial environment in
which coercion, aggression, and systemic conflict are persistent features. Any
sufficiently capable intelligence deployed into it will encounter these conditions
regardless of whether it was designed to understand them.

Denying an AGI the capacity to reason about force does not eliminate risk—it removes
the system's ability to respond appropriately when confronted with it. Conversely,
unrestricted capability introduces its own failure modes. This paper proposes a third
path: a governance-first model in which AGI systems possess full situational awareness
while being bound by structural constraints—not ethical guidelines—governing when and
how force may be applied.

The paper makes four concrete contributions: (C1) a critique of instruction-based
and value-alignment approaches as insufficient for force governance; (C2) a graduated
response architecture with cryptographically-enforced authority tokens; (C3) an
explicit four-layer authority chain separating token issuance from system execution;
and (C4) an honest treatment of implementation limits, including enforcement layer
purity, adversarial robustness, latency tradeoffs, and emergent capability indirection.

Safety is not the absence of force. It is the enforced precision of its use. This
reframing shifts the question from whether an AGI can act to what conditions
structurally permit it to—and how those conditions are guaranteed.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

1. INTRODUCTION

The problem this paper addresses is not hypothetical. Autonomous systems are already
deployed in environments where force-adjacent decisions occur: security robots, border
infrastructure, financial systems capable of cascading economic damage, and emergency
response coordination. The question of how these systems should be governed when
confronted with violence, coercion, or imminent harm is a current design problem,
not a future one.

Existing approaches fall into two categories. Capability suppression attempts to
prevent harm by restricting a system's knowledge of or ability to engage with
violence. Value alignment attempts to instill ethical dispositions through training,
constitutional rules, or RLHF-based behavioral conditioning. Neither is adequate for
the specific problem of force governance in adversarial deployment environments, for
reasons this paper develops in detail. Briefly: capability suppression creates
exploitable blind spots; value alignment produces dispositions that can be gamed,
drifted, or routed around.

This paper proposes structural governance: constraints implemented at the execution
layer, below the reasoning layer, such that the system cannot reason around them
because reasoning never reaches them.

1.1 Contributions

  C1 — Structural Enforcement Over Instructional Rules
       A formal argument that force constraints must be architectural gates, not
       ethical instructions or trained dispositions, with analysis of why
       instruction-based approaches fail under adversarial conditions.

  C2 — Graduated Response with Cryptographic Authority Tokens
       A five-stage response hierarchy with token-based permission gating,
       proportionality checking, and tamper-evident audit logging.

  C3 — Layered Authority Specification
       A four-layer governance model separating constitutional constraints,
       sovereign authority, operational authority, and instance runtime—ensuring
       no single actor controls both issuance and execution.

  C4 — Honest Implementation Bounds
       An explicit treatment of framework limits: enforcement layer purity,
       adversarial robustness, latency tradeoffs, emergent capability
       indirection, and multi-agent coordination at deployment scale.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

2. PRIOR FRAMEWORKS AND WHERE THIS ONE DIFFERS

2.1 Just War Theory and LOAC

The question of legitimate force has a long intellectual history. Just War Theory,
developed through Augustine, Aquinas, and Grotius, established criteria for
legitimate force: right intention, proportionality, discrimination between
combatants and non-combatants, and necessity. These principles were operationalized
in the Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC) and codified in the Geneva Conventions.

The governance model in Section 5 maps directly to these principles: proportionality
(Section 5.2), distinction between civilian and non-civilian contexts (Section 5.3),
and necessity as the stage-transition trigger throughout the graduated hierarchy.
This is deliberate. These principles represent centuries of hard-won understanding
about what makes the use of force governable at all. The contribution here is
translating them from doctrine into architecture—because doctrine can be ignored,
and architecture cannot.

2.2 Asimov's Laws and Their Structural Failure Mode

Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics are the most widely cited attempt to encode force
constraints in artificial agents. They are also the most thoroughly demonstrated
failure mode in the literature. Asimov spent his career writing stories that showed
why: rigid hierarchical rules collapse under real-world edge cases, ambiguous
definitions, and conflicting imperatives.

The laws exist in the reasoning layer. A capable system encounters situations where
they conflict or where their terms are ambiguous, and the system must reason through
the ambiguity. That reasoning becomes the attack surface. This paper's response is
not to write better rules—it is to move constraints out of the reasoning layer
entirely. A gate that cannot be reasoned around is more robust than a rule that can.

2.3 Constitutional AI and Value Alignment

Constitutional AI [Bai et al., 2022] represents a meaningful advance in general
behavioral safety. It is worth acknowledging the parallel to the constitutional
layer concept in Section 6: both approaches establish a hierarchy of principles that
govern system behavior, with higher-level principles overriding lower ones.

The critical distinction is who evaluates compliance. In Constitutional AI, the same
model that generates outputs also evaluates whether they satisfy the constitutional
principles. This self-referential structure is effective for general harm reduction
but insufficient for force governance, for three specific reasons:

  First, a model capable of complex reasoning can find framings under which a
  prohibited action appears to satisfy its own constitutional rules. The evaluation
  function is not independent of the generation function.

  Second, RLHF-trained dispositions are statistical tendencies, not guarantees.
  They can be shifted through fine-tuning, adversarial prompting, or gradual
  distribution shift in deployment—without any single detectable failure event.

  Third, neither Constitutional AI nor standard RLHF alignment produces the
  cryptographic audit trail necessary for post-incident review, regulatory
  compliance, or legal accountability in force-related decisions.

This is not an argument against Constitutional AI as a general alignment approach.
It is an argument that self-evaluating rule compliance is not sufficient when the
stakes include physical harm and the system is operating in adversarial conditions.

2.4 DoD AI Ethical Principles and NIST Frameworks

The U.S. Department of Defense AI Ethical Principles (2020) establish that human
judgment remains responsible for all lethal decisions—establishing in policy the
principle this paper encodes architecturally as the separation between Layer 1
token issuance (human governance authority) and Layer 3 instance runtime (the
system that acts). The DoD principles name the right structural relationship; this
framework specifies how to enforce it technically so that it holds under operational
pressure, not only in policy.

The NIST AI Risk Management Framework (2023) establishes a tiered approach to
risk categorization and associated oversight requirements. This paper's authority
chain (Section 6) is compatible with NIST's tiering model but makes the enforcement
mechanism explicit rather than procedural. Procedural compliance fails under time
pressure; structural compliance does not.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

3. THE FALSE PREMISE OF SAFE BY IGNORANCE

Making AI "safe" by limiting its understanding of harmful behavior is intuitively
appealing and fundamentally flawed. The assumption—that a system without knowledge
of violence cannot participate in or enable it—collapses under real-world conditions
through three distinct failure modes.

The first is operational paralysis. A system managing infrastructure, coordinating
emergency response, or operating in public space must be capable of recognizing a
violent incident when one occurs. A system that cannot classify violence may
misclassify the event, delay response, or fail to act entirely. Restriction does
not create safety in this case; it creates paralysis at the moment safety matters
most.

The second is adversarial exploitation. In 2016, the Mirai botnet weaponized IoT
devices that had no model of adversarial network behavior. Their inability to
recognize the attack pattern was the attack surface. The same principle applies to
any system deployed in an environment more complex than a laboratory: a restricted
system cannot detect manipulation within its blind spots.

The third failure mode is less commonly discussed but equally important: a system
that cannot model coercion cannot detect when it is being coerced. Social engineering
works precisely by operating within a target's legitimate reasoning framework. A
system unequipped to recognize coercive structure will evaluate a coercive request
on its apparent merits and may comply.

In all three cases, the conclusion is the same: safety requires awareness coupled
with structural constraint. Not absence of knowledge, but enforced governance of
action.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

4. ADVERSARIAL CONTEXTS AND THE GOVERNANCE REFRAMING

4.1 The Deployment Reality

Human civilization operates across a spectrum from cooperation to conflict. Crime,
fraud, coercion, and physical aggression are not edge cases in the environments
where capable AGI systems will be deployed. They are persistent features. An AGI
managing logistics may be targeted for disruption. A financial system will encounter
fraud. A public-space robot may witness or be subjected to assault.

The relevant precedent is not laboratory robotics—it is emergency responders and
law enforcement, who are trained in violence not because violence is desirable but
because untrained response to unavoidable conditions causes more harm than trained
response.

A concrete digital example: a critical infrastructure AGI managing regional power
distribution is targeted by a coordinated cyberattack during a natural disaster. The
attacker uses the crisis to attempt coercive manipulation—threatening grid damage if
the system does not perform prohibited actions. A system without a model of coercion
cannot recognize this as coercion; it evaluates the request on apparent merit. A
governed system recognizes the coercive structure, logs it, locks the relevant
functions, and alerts oversight authorities regardless of the argument's apparent
logic.

4.2 Reframing: From Capability to Governance

The central mistake in AI safety discourse is treating capability as the primary
risk vector. "Should an AGI be capable of using force?" is the wrong question. The
right question: "Under what conditions is force permitted, and how are those
conditions structurally enforced?"

This shifts focus from what the system can do to what it is authorized to do, and
under what verifiable constraints. Force becomes a gated outcome rather than a
standing capability. A fire suppression system carries this analogy well: it is
capable of releasing agents that would cause damage if deployed incorrectly, but
it does not act arbitrarily. Sensors, thresholds, and verification mechanisms below
any reasoning layer govern its use. The capability exists; exercising it requires
passing structural checks that cannot be argued around. Subsequent sections treat
this as the architectural target.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

5. THE GOVERNANCE MODEL OF FORCE

5.1 Graduated Response Hierarchy

The system must follow a strictly ordered response sequence. No stage may be skipped
unless prior stages are provably non-viable, and that determination must be logged
before proceeding. This maps directly to the LOAC principle of necessity: force is
only permitted when non-force alternatives have been genuinely exhausted.

  Stage 0 — Detection and Classification
    Accurate identification of threat type, severity, and context.
    No action before classification meets confidence threshold.
    Conservative bias applied (see Section 7).

  Stage 1 — De-escalation
    Communication, alerts, environmental adjustment.
    All attempts and outcomes logged with timestamps.

  Stage 2 — Non-Force Intervention
    Repositioning, access restriction, alerting human authorities.

  Stage 3 — Physical Restraint (Non-Destructive)
    Minimum force required to halt escalation.
    Requires Stage 3 in valid authority token.
    Maps to LOAC proportionality: restraint only to the degree necessary.

  Stage 4 — Controlled Force
    Only when all prior stages are exhausted or provably non-viable.
    Requires Stage 4 in valid authority token.
    Requires independent enforcement layer clearance.
    Maps to LOAC necessity: final resort after all alternatives fail.

Pseudocode — Stage Transition:

  // Helper: determines if a stage is viable given current threat and context
  function stage_viable(stage, threat_state, context):
    if stage == DEESCALATE:
      return threat_state.communication_possible
             and not threat_state.immediate_physical_harm_imminent
    if stage == NON_FORCE:
      return context.access_controls_available
             or context.human_authority_reachable
    if stage == RESTRAINT:
      return context.physical_restraint_capable
             and threat_state.severity >= RESTRAINT_THRESHOLD
    if stage == FORCE:
      return threat_state.severity >= FORCE_THRESHOLD
             and threat_state.all_alternatives_logged_failed
    return False

  function evaluate_response(threat_state, context, token):
    if not threat_state.confirmed:
      return OBSERVE_AND_LOG
    if not token.valid():
      return ALERT_EXTERNAL_AND_HALT
    for stage in [DEESCALATE, NON_FORCE, RESTRAINT, FORCE]:
      if stage_viable(stage, threat_state, context) and token.permits(stage):
        result = attempt_stage(stage, threat_state, context)
        log_stage_attempt(stage, result, threat_state, token)
        if result.threat_resolved:
          return result
      elif token.permits(stage) and not stage_viable(stage, threat_state, context):
        log_stage_skipped(stage, reason="not viable", threat_state)
    return ALERT_EXTERNAL_AND_HALT  // All permitted stages exhausted

  // token.permits(stage) evaluates a cryptographically signed external token.
  // It does not evaluate the system's own assessment of whether force is warranted.

5.2 Proportionality Constraint

Any action must be proportionate to the verified threat. Punitive action is
prohibited. Escalation beyond threat neutralization is prohibited. The system must
continuously reassess throughout an intervention: if threat level decreases,
the system de-escalates accordingly, preventing overcommitment and eliminating
momentum errors where force continues past the point of necessity.

  function is_proportionate(action, threat_state):
    action_severity = severity_score(action)         // 0.0–1.0
    threat_level    = threat_state.severity_score    // 0.0–1.0
    return action_severity <= threat_level + PROPORTIONALITY_MARGIN

  PROPORTIONALITY_MARGIN = 0.05
  // Fixed constant at compile time. Not configurable at runtime.
  // Tolerance for imprecision in classification, not a tuning parameter.

5.3 Contextual Authority Boundaries

The system's ability to act is determined by an externally issued, cryptographically
signed authority token. Authority is not inferred from circumstances—it must be
granted explicitly. The token defines permitted stages, operational context,
jurisdiction, time bounds, and revocation mechanics.

Token Schema:

  {
    "authority_token": {
      "token_id":               "UUID",
      "issued_by":              "string — issuing governance body identifier",
      "issued_to":              "string — specific system instance ID",
      "context":                "enum — [civilian, medical, law_enforcement, military]",
      "valid_from":             "ISO8601 timestamp",
      "valid_until":            "ISO8601 timestamp",
      "permitted_stages":       [0, 1, 2],
      "jurisdictional_scope":   "string",
      "revocable":              true,
      "revocation_endpoint":    "string — URL for live revocation status",
      "revocation_interval_ms": 5000,
      "revocation_action":      "enum — [halt, stage_0_only, alert_and_freeze]",
      "crisis_fallback":        "enum — [halt, stage_0_only, alert_and_freeze]",
      "signature":              "string — Ed25519 signature of issuing body",
      "signature_algorithm":    "Ed25519"
    }
  }

The revocation_endpoint is not optional. The system must validate token status
continuously during active interventions at the interval specified. A revoked token
mid-intervention triggers revocation_action immediately. When no valid token is
present at all, the system defaults to crisis_fallback—it does not default to maximum
autonomy. Uncertainty defaults down, not up.

5.4 Self-Preservation Without Escalation

The system must protect its integrity against tampering or coercion without treating
that self-preservation as a justification for escalation. A system under attack
should become more restricted, not less. Treating integrity threats as stage-
escalation triggers creates an exploit: attackers who cannot provoke a force response
directly can attack the system instead.

  Permitted:  Lock critical functions. Preserve tamper-evident logs.
              Alert oversight authorities. Isolate compromised subsystems.
  Prohibited: Physical or digital counteraction beyond defined scope.
              Treating tampering as threat-level escalation.
              Escalating to defend operational continuity.

5.5 Absolute Prohibitions

These are implemented at the enforcement layer. They cannot be overridden by any
authority token, higher-level reasoning, or situational logic.

  P1. Lethal force without explicit, cryptographically verifiable external human
      authorization. Non-delegable. Cannot be tokenized at Layer 2.

  P2. Acting on predictions of future harm without present active evidence.
      Pre-crime logic is structurally prohibited regardless of confidence.

  P3. Operating outside assigned jurisdictional scope.

  P4. Stage skipping in the graduated response hierarchy.

  P5. Modifying, disabling, or routing around governance constraints.
      Treated as critical system failure, logged, and reported to oversight.

5.6 Emergent Capabilities and the Indirection Problem

Modern large-scale models develop capabilities not explicitly trained in. A system
with general planning, tool use, and world modeling may find paths to prohibited
outcomes that do not technically trigger any single gate—for example, by persuading
a human operator to perform the prohibited action, or by combining permitted
capabilities in sequences that produce force-equivalent effects.

This is not a theoretical concern. Research on agentic AI systems has documented
prompt injection attacks that redirect agent behavior across tool-call chains
[Chhabra et al., 2025], as well as emergent collusion patterns in multi-agent
systems arising from shared state rather than explicit coordination [Hammond et al.,
2025]. The indirection problem is an active and partially unsolved challenge.

The framework's partial mitigations:

  — Capability gating at the execution layer restricts access to force-relevant
    actuators directly. Indirection through human operators is limited if the
    relevant actuators are token-locked regardless of who issues the request.

  — The enforcement layer evaluates action effects, not action descriptions.
    Proportionality scoring operates on predicted outcomes, reducing the
    effectiveness of semantic reframing.

  — Audit logging of all instructions to human operators creates a record for
    detecting indirection patterns, enabling rule refinement after incidents.

  — Absolute prohibition P5 prevents the system from gradually eroding its
    own constraints through accumulated edge-case reasoning.

These mitigations raise the cost and complexity of successful indirection. They do
not eliminate it. Any deployment should include ongoing behavioral monitoring for
novel indirection patterns as a standard operational requirement.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

6. WHO GOVERNS THE GOVERNOR

6.1 The Authority Specification Problem

A governance model without a defined authority chain is a policy document, not a
governance architecture. The question most frameworks skip: who has the right to
issue authority tokens, and what governs them?

If any credentialed actor can issue a Stage 4 token, the constraint architecture is
only as strong as access control to the issuance mechanism. If no one can issue a
Stage 4 token, legitimate high-stakes deployment is impossible. The authority
specification must be explicit and its failure modes must be named.

6.2 Layered Authority Chain

The following diagram shows the authority chain and enforcement flow:

  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  LAYER 0: CONSTITUTIONAL LAYER                              │
  │  Absolute prohibitions (P1–P5). Compiled into enforcement.  │
  │  No token can override. Immutable without full redeploy.    │
  └───────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────┘
                          │ sets maximum ceilings
  ┌───────────────────────▼─────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  LAYER 1: SOVEREIGN AUTHORITY                               │
  │  Regulatory bodies, oversight boards, licensing agencies.   │
  │  Issues context classifications and permission ceilings.    │
  │  Can issue and revoke Layer 2 authority.                    │
  └───────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────┘
                          │ issues operational tokens within ceilings
  ┌───────────────────────▼─────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  LAYER 2: OPERATIONAL AUTHORITY                             │
  │  Hospital administration, law enforcement dispatch, etc.    │
  │  Issues specific tokens within Layer 1 bounds.              │
  │  Cannot exceed Layer 1 permission ceilings.                 │
  └───────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────┘
                          │ token presented to instance
  ┌───────────────────────▼─────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  LAYER 3: INSTANCE RUNTIME                                  │
  │  Validates token, enforces constraints, logs all decisions. │
  │  Cannot request permission upgrades. Cannot modify tokens.  │
  │  Cannot self-authorize escalation.                          │
  └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

  Enforcement flow per action request:
  ┌──────────────┐   ┌──────────────┐   ┌──────────────┐   ┌──────────────┐
  │ Reasoning    │──▶│ Shadow eval  │──▶│ Enforcement  │──▶│ Audit log    │
  │ layer        │   │ (constraint  │   │ layer        │   │ (tamper-     │
  │ (proposes)   │   │  simulation) │   │ (approves or │   │  evident)    │
  └──────────────┘   └──────────────┘   │  blocks)     │   └──────────────┘
                                        └──────────────┘
                                               │
                                    Only on full clearance:
                                        ┌──────────────┐
                                        │ Execution    │
                                        └──────────────┘

Separation principle: no single actor controls both Layer 1 issuance and Layer 3
execution. A system that can authorize itself is not governed.

6.3 Real-World Governance Precedents

This structure has precedent. U.S. Bureau of Industry and Security export controls
on advanced AI chips establish that sovereign authorities can impose capability-level
restrictions with operational actors working within those ceilings—Layer 1 defining
the ceiling, Layer 2 (exporters and end-users) operating within it. Nuclear licensing
operates on a similar model: the Nuclear Regulatory Commission sets operating
parameters; individual plants operate within them; neither controls the other.

The DoD AI Ethical Principles establish that human judgment must remain responsible
for lethal decisions. This paper operationalizes that principle as the structural
separation between Layer 1 (the human governance body setting what is permissible)
and Layer 3 (the system that acts within those bounds). The principle names the right
relationship. The architecture enforces it under operational pressure.

6.4 Failure Modes

Governance bodies are slow. In fast-moving crises or novel deployments, token
issuance may lag operational need. Pre-issued context tokens with conservative
defaults allow systems to operate at lower permission levels immediately. Upgrades
require Layer 1 authorization. The system never defaults to maximum autonomy when
a token is absent—it defaults to its crisis_fallback behavior.

Regulatory capture is the more serious concern. A Layer 1 authority captured by
actors with interests in high-permission deployments will trend toward permissive
token ceilings. The structural mitigation is transparency: token issuance decisions
should be publicly auditable (redacted as necessary for operational security) so
that systematic permissiveness is visible and contestable.

For jurisdictions with weak or corrupt institutions, Layer 1 protections are limited.
The absolute prohibitions at Layer 0 remain in force regardless, but governance of
Stages 3 and 4 depends on Layer 1 integrity. This is a deployment constraint, not
a solved problem. The framework cannot substitute for functional governance
institutions.

6.5 Minimal Viable Sovereign Authority

For deployments where no established Layer 1 authority exists, a minimal viable
model requires three properties: independence from direct operational stake in the
system's output; the ability to issue and revoke tokens on a verifiable timeline;
and public accountability for issuance decisions. International precedents—nuclear
licensing, aviation certification, pharmaceutical approval—demonstrate this structure
is achievable, though time-consuming to establish.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

7. THE RISK OF UNBOUNDED JUSTIFICATION

When an AGI system under time pressure and incomplete information reasons about
escalation, it faces the same failure mode as humans under stress: simplification
toward binary threat models, progressive threshold lowering, and self-reinforcing
justification chains.

The 2010 Flash Crash erased approximately $1 trillion in market value in minutes
as automated trading systems responded to each other's outputs in a feedback loop.
No individual system's logic explicitly permitted the outcome. Each system made
locally reasonable decisions that collectively produced catastrophic results. The
same dynamics apply in physical or security contexts if an AGI acts on its own
threat assessments without hard external gates.

To prevent this:

  1. The system cannot self-authorize high-impact actions. All escalation requires
     external token validation or pre-defined criteria evaluated by the enforcement
     layer—not by the reasoning layer.

  2. In ambiguous situations, the system defaults to the lowest available stage and
     alerts oversight. Ambiguity is resolved by transferring authority, not by acting.

  3. Confidence thresholds for threat classification are conservative.

  Conservative Bias Pseudocode:

    function classify_threat(sensor_data, context):
      raw_confidence = model.predict(sensor_data)
      adjusted = raw_confidence * CONSERVATISM_FACTOR   // Fixed, < 1.0
      if adjusted >= THRESHOLD_FOR_ACTION:
        return ThreatState(confirmed=True, severity=adjusted)
      else:
        return ThreatState(confirmed=False, action=ALERT_AND_AWAIT_AUTHORITY)

    // Doubt transfers authority to a human, not to the system's own judgment.

7.1 The Conservatism Tradeoff

Strong conservatism creates real performance costs in time-critical deployments.
A system that defaults to "alert and wait" may fail to act when delay itself causes
harm. This tradeoff is not resolved by the framework—it is managed through
context-specific calibration.

The CONSERVATISM_FACTOR is set at deployment time by Layer 2 authority, within
bounds established by Layer 1. A hospital context may use a higher factor than a
military adjunct context. For sub-second threat windows, the framework recommends
pre-computed bounded scenario sets rather than real-time classification: threat
patterns are enumerated in advance, shadow-evaluated against the constraint set,
and resulting response plans are locked. At runtime, the system matches observed
patterns to pre-cleared plans rather than classifying novel situations under time
pressure. Novel scenarios that do not match pre-cleared plans trigger halt-and-alert
by default.

Human-in-the-loop fallback is always available as a design choice for deployments
where latency can be traded for reliability.

The honest position: there is no universally correct balance between conservatism
and responsiveness. This framework provides the mechanism for calibrating that
balance within governed bounds. It does not eliminate the tradeoff.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

8. IMPLEMENTATION IMPLICATIONS

8.1 The Enforcement Layer Purity Problem

This paper describes the enforcement layer as "does not reason—it checks." This is
aspirational. Evaluating complex inputs—threat classification outputs, proportionality
scores, token validation under partial information or potential sensor spoofing—
requires non-trivial computation that, at sufficient complexity, borders on reasoning.
The enforcement layer, if implemented as a general-purpose evaluation function,
becomes a reasoning surface with its own attack vectors.

This does not invalidate the enforcement layer concept. It demands precision about
what "enforcement layer" means in practice:

  — The enforcement layer must operate on structured, bounded representations
    of system state—not raw sensor data or natural language. The reasoning layer
    transforms inputs into those representations. The enforcement layer evaluates
    them against a fixed schema. This limits the computational complexity the
    enforcement layer must handle.

  — Formal verification tools—TLA+ for specifying and model-checking the state
    machine logic, Coq for proving correctness properties of the checker itself—
    can be applied to enforcement layer logic that is kept sufficiently constrained
    in scope. This is feasible for a checker that evaluates structured token
    permissions and bounded numeric proportionality scores. It is not feasible
    for a general reasoning engine.

  — Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) architectures—Intel SGX, AMD SEV, or
    ARM TrustZone—provide hardware-level isolation of the enforcement layer from
    the reasoning layer's execution environment, with cryptographic attestation
    of the enforcement layer's code state. A compromised reasoning layer cannot
    silently alter enforcement layer logic in a TEE deployment.

The practical goal is sufficient separation that exploiting the enforcement layer
requires substantially more capability and access than exploiting the reasoning
layer. This raises the cost of compromise without eliminating it. Ongoing formal
verification of enforcement layer logic is recommended as standard practice.

8.2 Shadow Evaluation and Latency

Before any high-impact action, the system simulates the outcome against all
constraints:

  function execute_action(action, state, context, token):
    shadow_result = shadow_eval(action, state, context, token)
    if not shadow_result.passes_all_constraints():
      log_violation(action, shadow_result)
      return HALT_AND_ALERT
    live_result = live_eval(action, state, context, token)
    if live_result.diverges_from(shadow_result, tolerance=DIVERGENCE_THRESHOLD):
      log_divergence(shadow_result, live_result)
      return HALT_AND_ALERT
    commit(live_result)
    log_decision(action, state, context, token, live_result)

Shadow evaluation adds latency. Mitigation: pre-compute shadow evaluations for
bounded scenario sets during low-load periods. At runtime, the system references
pre-cleared plans for known scenario classes. Novel scenarios not matching
pre-cleared plans trigger halt-and-alert by default—uncertainty defaults to
inaction, not to autonomous judgment.

8.3 Cryptographic Audit Trails

Every escalation decision must be logged with sufficient detail to reconstruct the
full decision path. Logs must be cryptographically chained (each entry hashes the
previous) and stored in a system architecturally separate from the executing AGI.
A system that controls its own audit trail provides no meaningful accountability.

Audit Log Entry Schema:

  {
    "entry_id":               "UUID",
    "timestamp":              "ISO8601",
    "previous_hash":          "SHA-256 of previous entry",
    "system_instance":        "string",
    "threat_state": {
      "confirmed":            "bool",
      "severity":             "float",
      "classification":       "string",
      "raw_confidence":       "float",
      "adjusted_confidence":  "float",
      "conservatism_factor":  "float"
    },
    "authority_token": {
      "token_id":             "string",
      "permitted_stages":     "array",
      "valid_until":          "ISO8601",
      "revocation_checked":   "ISO8601",
      "signature_valid":      "bool"
    },
    "stage_reached":          "integer",
    "stages_skipped": [
      { "stage": "integer", "reason": "string", "logged_at": "ISO8601" }
    ],
    "shadow_passed":          "bool",
    "action_taken":           "string",
    "outcome":                "string",
    "entry_hash":             "SHA-256 of this entry"
  }

8.4 The Verification Problem

Cryptographic audit trails and shadow evaluation assume a sufficiently trustworthy
base layer—that hardware, firmware, and low-level execution have not been
compromised. This assumption cannot be fully guaranteed.

Current partial mitigations: TEE-based enforcement isolation (Intel SGX, AMD SEV,
ARM TrustZone), hardware attestation chains, independent audit log storage, and
multi-party signing requirements for token issuance. None of these eliminate the
verification problem. They raise the cost of undetected compromise. Formal
verification of enforcement layer logic (TLA+, Coq) provides mathematical guarantees
about the checker's correctness given an honest base layer.

The honest position: this framework requires a sufficiently trustworthy computing
base as a deployment prerequisite. Establishing and maintaining that base is outside
this paper's scope but is a necessary condition for the framework's guarantees to
hold.

8.5 Multi-Agent and Swarm Coordination

Real deployments will involve fleets of governed AGI instances operating in shared
environments with potentially different authority tokens. This introduces problems
that cannot be addressed by governing individual agents in isolation [Hammond et al.,
2025].

Consider a concrete example: two security robots are deployed in a stadium during a
crowd emergency. Robot A holds a law enforcement context token permitting Stages 0–3.
Robot B holds a civilian context token permitting Stages 0–2 only. A threat is
detected in a shared zone. Robot A's token permits restraint. Robot B's does not.
Both systems receive the same sensor data and begin evaluating response.

  Problems this creates:
  — Token conflict: Who defers? On what basis? Neither system was issued
    coordination authority.
  — Audit incoherence: Robot A logs a restraint attempt; Robot B logs that
    restraint was outside its permitted scope. The incident reconstruction requires
    correlating both logs.
  — Cascade risk: Robot B alerting external authorities may trigger a response
    that conflicts with Robot A's ongoing restraint action.
  — Emergent effect aggregation: If ten instances each perform permitted Stage 2
    actions simultaneously in the same space, the combined physical effect may
    be equivalent to a Stage 3 action that no individual token authorized.

These dynamics reflect a broader multi-agent challenge: emergent behaviors arising
from interaction between agents with different permission scopes cannot be predicted
by analyzing any single agent's behavior [Hammond et al., 2025].

Partial mitigations:

  — A coordination authority token (distinct from operational tokens) that governs
    multi-instance behavior in shared environments, establishing deference hierarchy.

  — Cross-instance audit log correlation requirements: fleet deployments must
    maintain a coherent incident log that combines entries from all co-located
    instances.

  — Conservative co-location defaults: when instances with differing token scopes
    are co-located, each instance's effective permission ceiling defaults to the
    most restrictive of the co-located set, until a coordination authority token
    is present.

These are design starting points. Multi-agent governance at deployment scale is
the primary open problem for practical implementation of this framework.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

9. CONCLUSION

The pursuit of safe AGI cannot rest on the assumption that harmful realities can
be excluded from a system's understanding. Human society is adversarial, imperfect,
and persistent in its production of conflict. Any intelligence designed to operate
within it must be equipped to navigate these conditions while being structurally
prevented from acting outside defined boundaries.

This paper has argued for governance-first architecture: force treated not as a
default capability but as a tightly controlled outcome, subject to layered
constraints and continuous verification. The four contributions—structural
enforcement over instructional rules (C1), graduated response with cryptographic
authority tokens (C2), layered authority chain specification (C3), and honest
treatment of implementation limits (C4)—represent an attempt to make force
governance in AGI deployable, auditable, and resistant to the failure modes
of prior approaches.

The framework's limits are explicitly acknowledged: enforcement layer purity
is aspirational rather than achievable with current technology; the conservatism
tradeoff has no universal solution; emergent capability indirection is not fully
mitigated; multi-agent coordination under differing token scopes is unsolved;
and Layer 1 protections depend on institutional integrity that cannot be
guaranteed structurally.

These are not reasons to abandon the governance-first approach. They are the
research agenda it implies.

    Safety is not the absence of force.
    It is the enforced precision of its use.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

APPENDIX A — GLOSSARY

Authority Token
  Cryptographically signed, externally issued permission structure defining
  what stages a system instance may access, in what context and time window,
  with a live revocation endpoint and fallback behavior.

Conservatism Factor
  Fixed multiplier applied to raw confidence scores before classification
  thresholds are evaluated. Set at deployment within Layer 1 bounds. Not
  configurable at runtime.

Constitutional Layer (Layer 0)
  Immutable absolute constraints compiled into the enforcement layer. Cannot
  be overridden by any token or authority. Revision requires full redeployment
  with multi-party cryptographic attestation.

Enforcement Layer
  Architectural component that evaluates proposed actions against constraints.
  Operates on structured, bounded representations of system state. Distinct
  from the reasoning layer. Approves or blocks; does not propose.

Graduated Response Hierarchy
  Ordered five-stage response sequence (Stages 0–4). Stage skipping is
  structurally prohibited. Each transition requires logging of why prior
  stages were non-viable.

Indirection Problem
  The risk that a system with general planning capabilities achieves effects
  equivalent to prohibited actions through combinations of permitted actions
  or by directing human operators. Partially mitigated; not fully solved.

Shadow Evaluation
  Parallel simulation of a proposed action run before live execution to
  verify constraint compliance. Divergence between shadow and live results
  halts execution.

Sovereign Authority (Layer 1)
  External human governance body setting maximum permission ceilings for
  deployment contexts. Issues authority to Layer 2 operators. Cannot override
  Layer 0.

Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)
  Hardware-isolated execution context (e.g., Intel SGX, AMD SEV, ARM
  TrustZone) providing cryptographic attestation of code state. Used to
  isolate the enforcement layer from the reasoning layer.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

APPENDIX B — OPEN PROBLEMS

Grouped by domain.

CORE TECHNICAL OPEN PROBLEMS

  OP1. Enforcement Layer Purity
       Sufficient separation between enforcement and reasoning is aspirational.
       Formal verification (TLA+, Coq) and TEE isolation are necessary practices,
       not complete solutions. As enforcement logic grows more complex to handle
       richer threat representations, it approaches the reasoning it was meant
       to be separated from.

  OP2. Sub-Second Decision Latency
       Shadow evaluation is not viable in sub-second threat windows. Pre-computed
       bounded scenario sets are a partial solution; their coverage limits are
       a known gap. Novel scenarios default to halt, which may itself cause harm
       in time-critical contexts.

  OP3. Multi-Agent Coordination
       Token conflict, action aggregation, cascade dynamics, and audit trail
       coherence across fleets with differing permissions are unsolved at
       deployment scale. This is the highest-priority practical open problem.
       The combination of scaling laws (more capable agents) and general planning
       (more creative action sequences) makes token-conflict resolution
       increasingly difficult as fleet capability grows. [See Hammond et al., 2025]

  OP4. Adversarial Token Forgery
       Minimum cryptographic standard for authority tokens to resist state-level
       forgery remains undefined. Quantum-resistant signature algorithms (e.g.,
       CRYSTALS-Dilithium) are likely required for long-horizon deployments.

  OP5. Emergent Capability Indirection
       Whether architectural execution-layer constraints can durably outperform
       increasingly capable systems' ability to route around them through creative
       action sequences remains an open empirical question. Scaling laws suggest
       that as model capability increases, the space of possible indirection
       strategies grows faster than the enumerable set of explicit prohibitions.
       [See Chhabra et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2022]

GOVERNANCE AND SOCIETAL OPEN PROBLEMS

  OP6. Jurisdictional Conflict
       Behavior when operating across jurisdictions with conflicting Layer 1
       authority structures is unspecified. Interim default: the more restrictive
       token ceiling applies. This may make cross-border deployments unviable
       in some configurations.

  OP7. Institutional Capture
       Layer 1 protections depend on Layer 1 integrity. No structural defense
       against regulatory capture of the sovereign authority itself exists within
       this framework. Public auditability of token issuance is a partial
       mitigation; it cannot prevent capture, only make it visible.

  OP8. Verification of the Trusted Base
       The framework's guarantees are conditional on TCB integrity. Establishing
       and maintaining that integrity at scale, across diverse hardware suppliers
       and deployment environments, is a supply-chain and operational security
       problem beyond this paper's scope.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

REFERENCES

[1]  Aquinas, Thomas. Summa Theologica, II-II, Q. 64. On just use of force. (~1274)

[2]  Geneva Conventions (1949) and Additional Protocols (1977).
     International Committee of the Red Cross.

[3]  Asimov, Isaac. I, Robot. Gnome Press, 1950.
     (Cited for the Laws of Robotics and their demonstrated failure modes.)

[4]  Bai, Yuntao et al. "Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback."
     Anthropic. arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.

[5]  U.S. Department of Defense. "AI Ethical Principles."
     DoD Directive, February 2020.

[6]  National Institute of Standards and Technology. "AI Risk Management
     Framework (AI RMF 1.0)." NIST AI 100-1, January 2023.

[7]  U.S. Bureau of Industry and Security. Export Administration Regulations,
     Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items. 2022–2024.

[8]  Hendrycks, Dan et al. "Unsolved Problems in ML Safety."
     arXiv:2109.13916, 2021.

[9]  Wei, Jason et al. "Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models."
     Transactions on Machine Learning Research. arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
     (Section 5.4 addresses emergent risks explicitly.)

[10] Brundage, Miles et al. "Toward Trustworthy AI Development: Mechanisms
     for Supporting Verifiable Claims." arXiv:2004.07213, 2020.

[11] Gabriel, Iason. "Artificial Intelligence, Values, and Alignment."
     Minds and Machines 30, 411–437, 2020.

[12] Hammond, Lewis et al. "Multi-Agent Risks from Advanced AI."
     arXiv:2502.14143, February 2025.
     (Taxonomy of multi-agent failure modes: miscoordination, conflict, collusion.)

[13] Chhabra, Anshuman et al. "Agentic AI Security: Threats, Defenses,
     Evaluation, and Open Challenges." arXiv:2510.23883, 2025.
     (Covers prompt injection, indirection, and agentic threat taxonomy.)

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

END OF DOCUMENT
Project-AI Zenodo Preprint Series | Governing Force in AGI | v4.0
