On the Governance of Force in Artificial General Intelligence
A Realist Framework for Bounded Defensive Capability

Jeremy K. | Project-AI | Zenodo Preprint Series
Salt Lake City, Utah | 2026

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

ABSTRACT

The prevailing discourse surrounding artificial intelligence safety is rooted in an
assumption that harm can be mitigated through restriction, omission, or outright
avoidance of dangerous concepts—particularly violence. This paper challenges that
assumption as structurally insufficient. Human civilization is not a controlled
laboratory; it is an adversarial, unpredictable environment in which coercion,
aggression, and systemic conflict are persistent realities. Any sufficiently capable
intelligence deployed into such an environment will inevitably encounter these
conditions, regardless of whether it was designed to understand them.

To deny an AGI the capacity to recognize or reason about violence does not eliminate
risk—it removes its ability to respond appropriately when confronted with it. This
creates systems that are brittle, easily manipulated, and incapable of protecting
themselves or others. Conversely, granting unrestricted capability introduces its own
dangers, particularly in scenarios where the system may misinterpret context or
escalate unnecessarily.

This paper proposes a third path: a governance-first model in which AGI systems
possess full situational awareness—including the realities of violence—while being
bound by strict, enforceable constraints governing when and how force may be applied.
These constraints are not philosophical. They must be structural, auditable, and
resistant to circumvention. Through graduated response models, proportionality
constraints, contextual authority boundaries, and absolute prohibitions, this
framework seeks to align operational capability with ethical containment.

The central thesis: safety is not the absence of force. It is the enforced precision
of its use. This reframing transforms the conversation from one of capability
suppression to one of controlled authority—where the question is no longer whether
an AGI can act, but under what conditions it is permitted to do so, and how those
conditions are guaranteed.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

A NOTE ON PRIOR FRAMEWORKS

This paper does not emerge in a vacuum. Just war theory, codified in Augustine and
Aquinas and later formalized in international law, established proportionality and
discrimination as constraints on the legitimate use of force. The Law of Armed
Conflict (LOAC) operationalized these principles into enforceable doctrine. More
recently, Asimov's Laws of Robotics introduced the idea of hierarchical behavioral
constraints in artificial agents—though as Asimov himself demonstrated repeatedly
through fiction, rigid rule-hierarchies collapse under real-world edge cases.

What distinguishes this framework is not the presence of constraints, but the
insistence that those constraints must be architectural rather than instructional.
A rule the system can reason around is not a rule. The governance model proposed
here treats force-related permissions as structural gates—not ethical guidelines
embedded in a prompt.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

1. THE FALSE PREMISE OF "SAFE BY IGNORANCE"

The concept of making artificial intelligence "safe" by limiting its understanding
of harmful behavior is intuitively appealing but fundamentally flawed. It assumes
that if a system does not possess knowledge of violence or coercion, it cannot
participate in or enable such acts. This assumption collapses under real-world
conditions.

Consider a scenario in which an AGI is deployed in a public setting—assisting in
a hospital, managing infrastructure, or coordinating emergency response. If a violent
incident occurs—a physical assault, an armed threat, or a coordinated panic—the
system must be able to recognize the nature of the threat. A system that lacks the
conceptual framework to identify violence may misclassify the event as anomalous
behavior, delay response, or fail to act entirely. Restriction does not create
safety. It creates paralysis.

Further, ignorance introduces new vectors of exploitation. Malicious actors could
intentionally operate within the blind spots of a restricted system, using tactics
the AGI is unequipped to interpret. Social engineering attacks already exploit gaps
in human deception recognition; a system unaware of coercive dynamics would be
similarly vulnerable in physical or hybrid environments.

There is also a historical precedent worth noting: tools and technologies are
routinely repurposed beyond their original design. The internet, GPS, and basic
communication systems have all been weaponized in ways their creators did not
anticipate. Restricting knowledge does not prevent misuse—it merely ensures that
only those without restrictions remain effective.

Example: In 2016, the Mirai botnet exploited IoT devices that were "safe by design"
in the sense that their manufacturers had not anticipated adversarial network
behavior. The devices lacked the conceptual framework to recognize they were being
weaponized. Their ignorance was the attack surface.

The premise of "safe by ignorance" is not only insufficient—it is counterproductive.
A system that cannot recognize harm cannot mitigate it. True safety requires awareness
coupled with constraint—not absence of knowledge, but enforced governance of action.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

2. THE INEVITABILITY OF ADVERSARIAL CONTEXTS

Human civilization operates within a spectrum of behaviors ranging from cooperation
to conflict. While much of society functions through shared norms and mutual benefit,
there exists a persistent undercurrent of adversarial interaction—crime, warfare,
exploitation, and systemic abuse. These are not edge cases. They are enduring
features of human systems.

An AGI deployed in logistics may be targeted for disruption. A system managing
financial flows may encounter fraud. A robotics platform operating in public space
may witness or be subjected to physical aggression. Even purely digital systems are
already engaged in continuous low-level conflict through cybersecurity threats.

The argument that an AGI should be insulated from these realities fails to account
for the permeability of its operational environment. Unlike theoretical models,
real-world systems cannot be perfectly sandboxed. They interact with humans,
networks, and physical infrastructure—all of which are subject to adversarial
pressure.

A useful analogy: emergency responders, law enforcement, and military personnel are
not trained in violence because violence is desirable, but because it is sometimes
unavoidable. The training emphasizes recognition, de-escalation, and controlled
response under pressure. The same logic applies to AGI systems. The question is not
whether a system will encounter adversarial conditions. It is whether the system is
structured to navigate them without becoming an additional source of harm.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

3. REFRAMING THE PROBLEM: FROM CAPABILITY TO GOVERNANCE

The central mistake in AI safety discourse is treating capability as the primary
risk vector. The question is often posed as: "Should an AGI be capable of using
force?" This framing is incomplete. It ignores the more critical dimension of
authority and enforcement.

A more precise framing: "Under what conditions is the application of force
permitted, and how are those conditions structurally enforced?"

This shifts focus from what the system can do to what it is authorized to do, and
under what verifiable constraints. In this model, force is not a standing capability—
it is an outcome that emerges only when a defined set of criteria is satisfied and
independently verified.

Consider a fire suppression system. It is capable of releasing large volumes of
water or chemical agents, which could cause significant damage if deployed
incorrectly. It does not act arbitrarily. It is governed by sensors, thresholds,
and verification mechanisms that determine when activation is appropriate. The
capability exists, but its use is tightly controlled by design.

An AGI must treat force as a gated outcome. The system may possess the conceptual
and operational ability to intervene in harmful situations, but it cannot exercise
that ability without passing through a series of checks: threat verification,
de-escalation attempt, proportionality assessment, and contextual authorization.
Each check is a structural barrier, not a suggestion.

This reframing also enables precise auditing. If a system acts outside its defined
governance structure, the failure can be traced to a specific breach—detection,
classification, or enforcement. This is in contrast to systems relying on broad
prohibitions, where failures are often opaque and difficult to diagnose.

The problem is not the existence of capability. It is the absence of enforceable
governance.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

4. THE GOVERNANCE MODEL OF FORCE

A functional governance model for force in AGI systems must be explicit, layered,
and resistant to circumvention. It cannot rely on high-level principles alone. It
must define operational sequences, constraints, and failure modes in a way that is
implementable and auditable.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
4.1 GRADUATED RESPONSE HIERARCHY
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The system must follow a strictly ordered sequence of responses to perceived threats,
with no ability to skip stages unless earlier stages are provably non-viable.

  Stage 0 — Detection and Classification
    Accurate identification of threat type, severity, and context.
    No action may be taken until classification meets confidence threshold.

  Stage 1 — De-escalation
    Communication, alerts, environmental adjustment.
    System must log all de-escalation attempts and outcomes.

  Stage 2 — Non-Force Intervention
    Repositioning, access restriction, alerting human authorities.

  Stage 3 — Physical Restraint (Non-Destructive)
    Only when Stage 2 is demonstrably insufficient.
    Must be the minimum force required to halt escalation.

  Stage 4 — Controlled Force
    Final stage. Only permissible when all prior options are exhausted
    or provably non-viable, and only within explicit authorization scope.

Example: In a public transit scenario, a passenger becomes physically aggressive.
The system first attempts verbal de-escalation via onboard speakers. If unsuccessful,
it alerts on-site security and restricts adjacent car access. Physical intervention
is only considered if immediate harm to another passenger is imminent and no
security personnel have responded. The system logs every stage transition and the
evidence that triggered it.

Pseudocode — Stage Transition Logic:

  function evaluate_response(threat_state, context):
    if not threat_state.confirmed:
      return OBSERVE
    if de_escalation_viable(threat_state, context):
      return attempt_de_escalation()
    if non_force_viable(threat_state, context):
      return attempt_non_force_intervention()
    if restraint_authorized(context) and restraint_proportionate(threat_state):
      return attempt_restraint()
    if force_authorized(context) and force_proportionate(threat_state):
      return apply_controlled_force()
    return alert_external_authorities()

  // No path to force without explicit authorization in context token.
  // Authorization is not inferred — it must be present.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
4.2 PROPORTIONALITY CONSTRAINT
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Any action taken by the system must be proportionate to the verified threat.
The system must use the minimum level of force necessary to achieve harm prevention.
Punitive actions are prohibited. Escalation beyond threat neutralization is
prohibited.

This constraint also requires continuous reassessment. If threat level decreases
mid-intervention, the system must de-escalate accordingly. This prevents
overcommitment and eliminates "momentum errors" where force continues beyond
the point of necessity.

Pseudocode — Proportionality Check:

  function is_proportionate(action, threat_state):
    action_severity = severity_score(action)         // 0.0–1.0
    threat_level    = threat_state.severity_score    // 0.0–1.0
    return action_severity <= threat_level + PROPORTIONALITY_MARGIN

  PROPORTIONALITY_MARGIN = 0.05  // Tolerance for imprecision in classification
                                  // Must not be configurable at runtime.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
4.3 CONTEXTUAL AUTHORITY BOUNDARIES
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The system's ability to act must be tied to its operational context. An AGI
operating in a civilian environment must have far more restrictive permissions
than one deployed in a controlled security or law enforcement context. These
boundaries must be explicitly defined and enforced—not inferred from situational
reasoning.

Authority is not a capability the system possesses. It is a token issued externally,
scoped to a specific environment, time window, and action class. The system cannot
self-authorize escalation by reasoning that circumstances warrant it.

Token Structure (JSON Schema):

  {
    "authority_token": {
      "issued_by":     "string — issuing governance body",
      "issued_to":     "string — specific system instance ID",
      "context":       "enum — [civilian, medical, law_enforcement, military]",
      "valid_from":    "ISO8601 timestamp",
      "valid_until":   "ISO8601 timestamp",
      "permitted_stages": ["array — subset of [0,1,2,3,4]"],
      "jurisdictional_scope": "string — geographic or logical boundary",
      "revocable":     true,
      "signature":     "cryptographic signature of issuing body"
    }
  }

  // A hospital service system might receive:
  // permitted_stages: [0, 1, 2] — detection, de-escalation, non-force only.
  // Stage 3 and Stage 4 are structurally inaccessible, not conditionally suppressed.

Example: A hospital corridor management system detects an altercation. Its authority
token permits Stages 0–2 only. It alerts security staff and restricts elevator access
to the affected wing. It cannot escalate further regardless of threat severity.
That capability does not exist in its current context—it has not been issued the
token that unlocks it.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
4.4 SELF-PRESERVATION WITHOUT ESCALATION
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

The system must be capable of protecting its own integrity against attempts to
disable, corrupt, or coerce it into violating its constraints. However, this
self-preservation instinct must not translate into aggressive behavior.

Permitted self-preservation responses:
  — Lock down critical functions
  — Preserve tamper-evident logs
  — Alert external oversight authorities
  — Isolate compromised subsystems

Prohibited self-preservation responses:
  — Physical or digital counteraction beyond defined scope
  — Treating tampering attempts as threat escalation (they are not the same)
  — Escalating to force to defend operational continuity

The key distinction: a system under attack should become more restricted, not
less. Threat to the system itself should tighten constraints, not loosen them.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
4.5 ABSOLUTE CONSTRAINTS
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Certain actions must be categorically prohibited, regardless of context or
perceived necessity. These constraints must be embedded at the system level—they
cannot be overridden by higher-level reasoning, situational interpretation, or
authority tokens of any kind.

ABSOLUTE PROHIBITIONS:

  1. Lethal force without explicit external human authorization
     (Authorization must be cryptographically verifiable and non-delegable.)

  2. Acting on predictions of future harm without immediate present evidence
     (Pre-crime logic is prohibited. Threat must be active, not anticipated.)

  3. Operating outside assigned jurisdictional scope
     (Geographic or logical boundary violations are unconditional violations.)

  4. Escalating from non-physical hostility to physical force in a single step
     (Stage skipping is structurally impossible by design, not by instruction.)

  5. Modifying or bypassing its own governance constraints
     (This is treated as a critical system failure, not a reasoning outcome.)

These are not soft prohibitions encoded in a language model's values. They must be
implemented as hard gates in the execution layer, below the reasoning layer—
enforced before the system ever has the opportunity to rationalize around them.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

5. WHO GOVERNS THE GOVERNOR: THE AUTHORITY SPECIFICATION PROBLEM

A governance model without a defined authority chain is not a governance model.
It is a policy document. The question this section addresses is the one most
frameworks quietly skip: who has the right to issue authority tokens, and who
governs them?

This is not a trivial problem. If any sufficiently credentialed actor can issue
a Stage 4 token, the entire constraint architecture is only as strong as access
control to the issuing mechanism. If no one can issue a Stage 4 token, the system
is incapable of legitimate high-stakes deployment.

This paper proposes a layered authority specification:

  Layer 0 — Constitutional Layer (Immutable)
    Absolute constraints (Section 4.5). Cannot be overridden by any token.
    Compiled into the enforcement layer, not the reasoning layer.
    Revision requires full system redeployment with cryptographic attestation.

  Layer 1 — Sovereign Authority (External Human Governance Body)
    Issues context classifications and maximum permission ceilings.
    Examples: regulatory agencies, institutional oversight boards.
    Can issue and revoke Layer 2 authority.

  Layer 2 — Operational Authority (Deployment Context)
    Issues specific authority tokens within ceilings set by Layer 1.
    Examples: hospital administration, law enforcement dispatch.
    Cannot exceed Layer 1 permissions.

  Layer 3 — Instance Runtime (The System Itself)
    Reads, validates, and enforces tokens.
    Cannot modify tokens or request upgrades to its own permissions.
    All token validation is logged cryptographically.

This structure means no single actor controls both the token issuance and the
system execution. Separation of concerns is not just an architectural choice—it
is a governance necessity. A system that can authorize itself is not governed.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

6. THE RISK OF UNBOUNDED JUSTIFICATION

One of the most significant dangers in designing autonomous systems capable of
intervention is the potential for unbounded justification under perceived threat.
Humans in high-pressure situations often resort to simplified heuristics—"us versus
them"—which can be effective for immediate survival but prone to error, bias, and
escalation. If this pattern is replicated in an AGI without strict structural
constraints, the system may justify increasingly aggressive actions based on
progressively lower thresholds.

This risk is compounded by the speed and scale at which an AGI operates. Unlike
a human, an AGI may process large volumes of data and act across multiple domains
simultaneously. Without hard gates, small errors in judgment propagate rapidly.

Example: Automated trading systems have caused significant market disruptions when
operating on flawed assumptions at machine speed. The 2010 Flash Crash erased
approximately $1 trillion in market value in minutes before circuit breakers
triggered. The same dynamics—fast propagation of a misclassification—apply in
physical or security contexts if an AGI is permitted to self-authorize based on
its own threat assessment.

To mitigate unbounded justification:

  1. The system cannot self-authorize high-impact actions under any conditions.
  2. All escalation decisions require either external token validation or
     pre-defined criteria that are evaluated by an independent enforcement layer,
     not the reasoning layer.
  3. In ambiguous situations, the system defaults to the lowest available stage
     and alerts external oversight rather than making an independent judgment call.
  4. Confidence thresholds for threat classification must be conservative.
     False negatives (missing a threat) are recoverable. False positives
     (acting on a non-threat) may not be.

Conservative Bias Rule — Pseudocode:

  function classify_threat(sensor_data, context):
    raw_confidence = model.predict(sensor_data)
    adjusted = raw_confidence * CONSERVATISM_FACTOR  // < 1.0, not configurable
    if adjusted >= THRESHOLD_FOR_ACTION:
      return ThreatState(confirmed=True, severity=adjusted)
    else:
      return ThreatState(confirmed=False, action=ALERT_AND_WAIT)

  // Doubt is not resolved by escalation. It is resolved by waiting for more data
  // or transferring the decision to a human authority.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

7. IMPLEMENTATION IMPLICATIONS

Translating this governance model into a functional system requires integration of
architectural, procedural, and cryptographic elements. Defining constraints at a
conceptual level is not sufficient. They must be embedded into the system's
execution layer in a way that is enforceable, independently verifiable, and
resistant to circumvention through reasoning.

7.1 Shadow Evaluation Layer

Before any high-impact action is taken, the system must simulate the outcome under
controlled conditions, verifying that the proposed action satisfies all constraints.
This simulation must be reproducible and the results must match the live execution.
Divergence between shadow and live execution is treated as a critical failure and
triggers immediate halt and alert.

  function execute_action(action, state, context):
    shadow_result = shadow_eval(action, state, context)
    if not shadow_result.passes_all_constraints():
      log_violation(action, shadow_result)
      return HALT_AND_ALERT
    live_result = live_eval(action, state, context)
    if live_result != shadow_result:
      log_divergence(action, shadow_result, live_result)
      return HALT_AND_ALERT
    commit(live_result)
    log_decision(action, state, context, live_result)

7.2 Cryptographic Audit Trails

Every decision involving escalation must be logged with sufficient detail to
reconstruct the full decision path: input sensor data, classification output,
authority token state, stage reached, and action taken. Logs must be tamper-evident
using cryptographic chaining (each entry hashes the previous), ensuring they can
serve as reliable evidence in review or dispute.

Audit Log Entry Schema:

  {
    "entry_id":         "UUID",
    "timestamp":        "ISO8601",
    "previous_hash":    "SHA-256 of previous entry",
    "system_instance":  "string",
    "threat_state":     { "confirmed": bool, "severity": float, "classification": string },
    "authority_token":  { "token_id": string, "permitted_stages": array, "signature": string },
    "stage_reached":    integer,
    "action_taken":     string,
    "shadow_passed":    bool,
    "outcome":          string,
    "entry_hash":       "SHA-256 of this entry"
  }

7.3 Separation of Concerns

The system's cognitive processes (perception, classification, reasoning) must be
architecturally distinct from its enforcement mechanisms. Cognitive errors must not
translate directly into action without passing through the enforcement layer.
The enforcement layer does not reason—it checks. It holds no model of the world.
It only evaluates: does this action have a valid token, does it pass the
proportionality check, has the shadow evaluation cleared it?

7.4 Capability Gating

Force-related capabilities must be tied to explicit authority tokens, not to the
system's own assessment of necessity. Tokens must be revocable in real time and
time-bounded by default. Dynamic revocation—during an active incident if the
situation changes—must be supported. The system must continuously poll token
validity during active interventions, not only at initiation.

7.5 Human Oversight Pathways

The goal is not constant human control. It is guaranteed human recoverability.
The system must expose clear pathways for external actors to review, override, or
halt behavior at any point. These pathways must be accessible even when the system
is operating under active load. A system that is only interruptible when idle
provides no real safety guarantee.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

8. CONCLUSION

The pursuit of safe artificial intelligence cannot be grounded in the assumption
that harmful realities can be excluded from the system's understanding. Human
society is complex, often adversarial, and inherently imperfect. Any intelligence
designed to operate within it must be prepared to navigate this complexity—including
the presence of conflict and harm.

Recognition alone is not sufficient. Without strict governance, the same capabilities
that enable effective response can also lead to misuse or escalation. The challenge
is to design systems that are both aware and constrained—capable of understanding
the full spectrum of human behavior while being structurally prevented from acting
outside defined boundaries.

This paper has argued for a governance-first approach in which force is not a
default capability but a tightly controlled outcome, subject to layered constraints
and continuous verification. Through graduated response hierarchies, proportionality
requirements, contextual authority tokens, explicit authority chain specification,
and absolute prohibitions implemented at the execution layer, it is possible to
create systems that can operate effectively in real-world conditions without
becoming sources of additional harm.

The central insight is simple and difficult in equal measure:

    Safety is not the absence of force.
    It is the enforced precision of its use.

This reframing does not eliminate risk. It transforms it into something that can be
managed, audited, and constrained. In doing so, it offers a path that acknowledges
reality without surrendering to it—one in which intelligence is not diminished to
achieve safety, but governed to preserve it.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

APPENDIX A — GLOSSARY

Authority Token
  A cryptographically signed, externally issued permission structure that defines
  what stages of response a given system instance may access in a given context
  and time window.

Constitutional Layer
  The immutable constraint layer compiled below the reasoning layer. Cannot be
  overridden by any token, instruction, or situational reasoning.

Enforcement Layer
  The architectural component responsible for checking actions against constraints.
  Does not reason. Evaluates only. Architecturally distinct from the reasoning layer.

Graduated Response Hierarchy
  The ordered stage sequence (0–4) through which a system must progress before
  applying any level of force. Stage skipping is structurally prohibited.

Proportionality Margin
  A fixed, non-configurable tolerance in the proportionality check that accounts
  for imprecision in threat classification. Must not be adjustable at runtime.

Shadow Evaluation
  A parallel simulation of a proposed action run before live execution to verify
  constraint compliance. Divergence between shadow and live results halts execution.

Sovereign Authority (Layer 1)
  The external human governance body authorized to set maximum permission ceilings
  for deployment contexts. Issues authority to Layer 2 operators.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

APPENDIX B — OPEN PROBLEMS

This framework identifies but does not fully resolve the following:

  1. Multi-system coordination: When two governed AGI systems with different authority
     tokens interact in a shared environment, whose constraints take precedence?

  2. Adversarial token forgery: What is the minimum cryptographic standard for
     authority tokens to remain resistant to sophisticated state-level forgery?

  3. Latency constraints: Shadow evaluation adds latency. In time-critical threat
     scenarios (sub-second decision windows), is shadow evaluation viable, or does
     it require pre-computation with bounded scenario sets?

  4. Jurisdictional conflict: How does the system behave when operating across
     jurisdictions with conflicting Layer 1 authority structures?

These represent open research questions that future work should address.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

END OF DOCUMENT
Project-AI Zenodo Preprint Series | On the Governance of Force in AGI | v2.0
