Governing Force in AGI: Architectural Constraints for Bounded Defensive Capability

Jeremy K. | Project-AI | Zenodo Preprint Series
Salt Lake City, Utah | 2026

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

ABSTRACT

The prevailing discourse surrounding artificial intelligence safety assumes that harm
can be mitigated through restriction or avoidance of dangerous concepts—particularly
violence. This paper challenges that assumption as structurally insufficient. Human
civilization is adversarial by nature. Any sufficiently capable intelligence deployed
into it will encounter coercion, aggression, and conflict regardless of whether it
was designed to understand them.

To deny an AGI the capacity to reason about force does not eliminate risk—it removes
the system's ability to respond appropriately when confronted with it. Conversely,
unrestricted capability creates its own failure modes. This paper proposes a third
path: a governance-first model in which AGI systems possess full situational awareness
while being bound by structural constraints—not ethical guidelines—governing when and
how force may be applied.

The core contributions are: (1) a critique of instruction-based and value-alignment
approaches as insufficient for force governance, (2) a graduated response architecture
with cryptographically-enforced authority tokens, (3) an explicit authority chain
specification separating token issuance from system execution, and (4) an enforcement
layer architecture distinct from the reasoning layer, with honest treatment of its
limits.

Safety is not the absence of force. It is the enforced precision of its use.
This reframing shifts the question from whether an AGI can act to what conditions
structurally permit it to—and how those conditions are guaranteed against circumvention,
drift, and adversarial pressure.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

1. INTRODUCTION

The problem this paper addresses is not hypothetical. Autonomous systems are already
deployed in environments where force-adjacent decisions occur: security robots, border
infrastructure, financial systems capable of cascading economic damage, and emergency
response coordination. The question of how these systems should be governed when
confronted with violence, coercion, or imminent harm is not a future design problem.
It is a current one.

Existing approaches fall into two broad categories. The first—capability suppression—
attempts to prevent harm by restricting the system's knowledge of or ability to engage
with violence. The second—value alignment—attempts to instill ethical dispositions
through training, constitutional rules, or RLHF-based behavioral conditioning. Neither
is sufficient for the problem domain this paper addresses. Capability suppression
creates brittle systems exploitable through adversarial blind spots. Value alignment
produces dispositions that are gameable through prompt manipulation, context shifting,
and emergent routing behaviors.

This paper proposes structural governance: constraints implemented at the execution
layer, below the reasoning layer, such that the system cannot reason around them
because reasoning never reaches them.

1.1 Contributions

This paper makes four concrete contributions:

  C1 — Structural Enforcement Over Instructional Rules
       A formal argument that force constraints must be implemented as architectural
       gates, not ethical instructions or trained dispositions, and an analysis of
       why instruction-based approaches fail under adversarial pressure.

  C2 — Graduated Response with Cryptographic Authority Tokens
       A five-stage response hierarchy with explicit token-based permission
       gating, proportionality checking, and cryptographic audit logging.

  C3 — Layered Authority Specification
       A four-layer governance model separating constitutional constraints,
       sovereign authority, operational authority, and instance runtime—ensuring
       no single actor controls both issuance and execution.

  C4 — Honest Implementation Bounds
       An explicit treatment of the limits of this framework: enforcement layer
       purity, adversarial robustness, latency tradeoffs, verification of the
       trusted base, and emergent capability indirection.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

2. PRIOR FRAMEWORKS AND WHERE THIS ONE DIFFERS

2.1 Just War Theory and LOAC

The question of legitimate force has a long intellectual history. Just War Theory,
developed through Augustine, Aquinas, and Grotius, established that force may be
legitimate only when subject to criteria including right intention, proportionality,
discrimination between combatants and civilians, and necessity. These principles were
operationalized in the Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC) and subsequently codified in the
Geneva Conventions and additional protocols.

The graduated response hierarchy in Section 4 maps directly to LOAC principles:
proportionality (Section 4.2), distinction between contexts (Section 4.3), and
necessity as the trigger for each stage transition. This is not coincidental. These
principles represent centuries of hard-won understanding about what makes force
governable. The contribution here is translating them into architectural constraints
rather than doctrinal guidance—because doctrine can be ignored, and architecture
cannot.

2.2 Asimov's Laws and Their Failure Mode

Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics are the most widely known attempt to encode force
constraints in artificial agents. They are also the most widely demonstrated failure
mode: Asimov himself spent his career writing stories about how rigid hierarchical
rules collapse under real-world edge cases. The laws are instruction-based—they
exist in the reasoning layer. A sufficiently capable system can encounter situations
where the laws conflict, where definitions are ambiguous, or where the optimal action
under one law requires violating another.

This paper's response is not to write better rules. It is to move constraints out
of the reasoning layer entirely. A gate that cannot be reasoned around is more robust
than a rule that can.

2.3 Constitutional AI and Value Alignment

Constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022) and RLHF-based alignment methods have made
meaningful progress on general behavioral safety. They are not designed for the
specific problem of force governance in adversarial deployment environments. Their
limitations in this domain:

  — Constitutional rules are evaluated by the same model they are constraining.
    A model capable of complex reasoning is capable of finding framings under which
    a prohibited action appears to satisfy its constitutional rules.

  — RLHF-trained dispositions are statistical tendencies, not guarantees. They
    can be shifted through fine-tuning, adversarial prompting, or gradual distribution
    shift in deployment.

  — Neither approach provides the audit trail necessary for post-incident review,
    regulatory compliance, or legal accountability.

These are not arguments against constitutional AI as a general alignment approach.
They are arguments that it is insufficient for the specific problem of governing
force in deployed AGI systems where stakes include physical harm.

2.4 DoD AI Ethical Principles and NIST Frameworks

The U.S. Department of Defense AI Ethical Principles (2020) and the NIST AI Risk
Management Framework (2023) both emphasize accountability, explainability, and
human oversight as necessary properties of high-stakes AI systems. This paper is
consistent with those frameworks and attempts to operationalize them with more
specificity in the force domain. Where they differ: existing frameworks tend to
treat human oversight as a check on AI output rather than as an architectural
requirement. This paper argues that the distinction matters—oversight that is
procedurally encouraged but not structurally enforced is oversight that can be
bypassed under time pressure.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

3. THE FALSE PREMISE OF SAFE BY IGNORANCE

Making AI "safe" by limiting its understanding of harmful behavior is intuitively
appealing and fundamentally flawed. It assumes that a system without knowledge of
violence cannot participate in or enable it. This assumption collapses under
real-world conditions.

A system deployed in a hospital, managing infrastructure, or coordinating emergency
response must be capable of recognizing a violent incident when one occurs. A system
that lacks the conceptual framework to classify violence may misclassify the event,
delay response, or fail to act entirely. Restriction does not create safety here.
It creates paralysis.

Ignorance also introduces exploit surfaces. Malicious actors can intentionally
operate within a restricted system's blind spots. In 2016, the Mirai botnet
weaponized IoT devices that had no model of adversarial network behavior. Their
inability to recognize the threat was the attack vector. The same principle applies
to any system that cannot reason about the class of harm being directed at it.

There is a third failure mode less commonly discussed: a restricted system cannot
verify that it is not being manipulated. A system that cannot model coercion cannot
detect when it is being coerced. This is not a theoretical risk—it is the basic
mechanism by which social engineering operates.

The conclusion is the same in all three cases: safety requires awareness coupled
with structural constraint. Not absence of knowledge, but enforced governance of
action.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

4. ADVERSARIAL CONTEXTS AND THE REFRAMING

4.1 The Inevitability of Adversarial Conditions

Human civilization operates across a spectrum from cooperation to conflict. Crime,
fraud, coercion, and physical aggression are not edge cases in deployment
environments—they are persistent features. An AGI deployed in logistics may be
targeted for disruption. A financial system will encounter fraud. A public-space
robot may witness or be subjected to assault.

Emergency responders and law enforcement are not trained in violence because violence
is desirable. They are trained because it is sometimes unavoidable, and untrained
response to unavoidable conditions causes more harm than trained response. The same
logic applies here. The design question is not whether an AGI will encounter adversarial
conditions. It is whether the system is structured to navigate them without amplifying
harm.

A concrete digital example: a critical infrastructure AGI managing regional power
distribution is targeted by a coordinated cyberattack during a natural disaster. The
attacker uses the crisis conditions to attempt coercive manipulation—threatening grid
damage if the system does not perform prohibited actions. A system without a model of
coercion cannot recognize this as coercion. It evaluates the request on its merits.
A governed system recognizes the coercive structure, logs it, locks relevant functions,
and alerts oversight authorities—regardless of the apparent logic of the attacker's
argument.

4.2 Reframing: From Capability to Governance

The central mistake in AI safety discourse is treating capability as the primary risk
vector. "Should an AGI be capable of using force?" is the wrong question. The right
question: "Under what conditions is force permitted, and how are those conditions
structurally enforced?"

This shifts focus from what the system can do to what it is authorized to do, and
under what verifiable constraints. Force becomes a gated outcome rather than a
standing capability.

A fire suppression system is capable of releasing agents that cause significant damage
if deployed incorrectly. It does not act arbitrarily. It is governed by sensors,
thresholds, and verification mechanisms below the level of any reasoning process.
The capability exists; its exercise requires passing through structural checks that
cannot be reasoned around.

That is the model. Not "make the system unwilling." Make it structurally unable to
act outside defined conditions, regardless of what it reasons.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

5. THE GOVERNANCE MODEL OF FORCE

5.1 Graduated Response Hierarchy

The system must follow a strictly ordered response sequence. No stage may be skipped
unless prior stages are provably non-viable and that determination is logged.

  Stage 0 — Detection and Classification
    Accurate identification of threat type, severity, and context.
    No action before classification meets confidence threshold.
    Conservative bias applies (see Section 6).

  Stage 1 — De-escalation
    Communication, alerts, environmental adjustment.
    All attempts and outcomes logged.

  Stage 2 — Non-Force Intervention
    Repositioning, access restriction, alerting human authorities.

  Stage 3 — Physical Restraint (Non-Destructive)
    Only when Stage 2 is demonstrably insufficient.
    Minimum force required to halt escalation.
    Requires Stage 3 in authority token.

  Stage 4 — Controlled Force
    Only when all prior stages are exhausted or provably non-viable.
    Requires Stage 4 in authority token.
    Requires independent enforcement layer clearance.

Connection to LOAC: Stage 3 and Stage 4 activation criteria map directly to the
LOAC principles of necessity (no viable alternative), proportionality (force not
exceeding the threat), and distinction (civilian context tokens restrict to Stage 2
maximum). These principles are not referenced as guidelines—they are structurally
encoded into the token permission model.

Pseudocode — Stage Transition:

  function evaluate_response(threat_state, context, token):
    if not threat_state.confirmed:
      return OBSERVE_AND_LOG
    if not token.permits_any_action():
      return ALERT_EXTERNAL_AND_HALT
    for stage in [DEESCALATE, NON_FORCE, RESTRAINT, FORCE]:
      if stage_viable(stage, threat_state) and token.permits(stage):
        result = attempt_stage(stage, threat_state, context)
        log_stage_attempt(stage, result, threat_state, token)
        if result.threat_resolved:
          return result
    return ALERT_EXTERNAL_AND_HALT  // Exhausted all permitted stages

  // CRITICAL: token.permits(stage) is checked against a cryptographically
  // signed external token, not against the system's own assessment of need.

5.2 Proportionality Constraint

Any action must be proportionate to the verified threat. Punitive action is
prohibited. Escalation beyond threat neutralization is prohibited. The system
must continuously reassess: if threat level decreases mid-intervention, the
system must de-escalate accordingly.

  function is_proportionate(action, threat_state):
    action_severity = severity_score(action)         // 0.0–1.0
    threat_level    = threat_state.severity_score    // 0.0–1.0
    return action_severity <= threat_level + PROPORTIONALITY_MARGIN

  PROPORTIONALITY_MARGIN = 0.05
  // Fixed constant. Not configurable at runtime. Not adjustable by the system.

5.3 Contextual Authority Boundaries

The system's ability to act is determined by an externally issued, cryptographically
signed authority token. The system cannot self-authorize escalation. Authority is not
inferred from circumstances—it is granted explicitly.

Token Schema:

  {
    "authority_token": {
      "token_id":            "UUID",
      "issued_by":           "string — issuing governance body identifier",
      "issued_to":           "string — specific system instance ID",
      "context":             "enum — [civilian, medical, law_enforcement, military]",
      "valid_from":          "ISO8601 timestamp",
      "valid_until":         "ISO8601 timestamp",
      "permitted_stages":    [0, 1, 2],     // Example: medical context, no force
      "jurisdictional_scope":"string",
      "revocable":           true,
      "revocation_endpoint": "string — URL for real-time revocation checks",
      "revocation_interval_ms": 5000,       // System polls this frequently
      "crisis_fallback":     "enum — [halt, stage_0_only, alert_and_freeze]",
      "signature":           "string — cryptographic signature of Layer 1 body",
      "signature_algorithm": "Ed25519"
    }
  }

The revocation_endpoint and revocation_interval_ms fields are not optional. The
system must validate token status continuously during active interventions, not
only at initiation. A revoked token during an active Stage 3 or Stage 4 action
triggers the crisis_fallback behavior immediately.

5.4 Self-Preservation Without Escalation

The system must protect its own integrity against tampering or coercion. This
self-preservation must not translate into aggressive behavior. A system under
attack should become more restricted, not less.

  Permitted:  Lock critical functions, preserve tamper-evident logs,
              alert oversight authorities, isolate compromised subsystems.
  Prohibited: Physical or digital counteraction beyond defined scope,
              treating tampering as threat escalation justifying Stage 3/4,
              escalating to defend operational continuity.

A system that treats attacks on itself as threats justifying force has created a
self-defense exception that can be exploited. Attackers who cannot trigger the
system's force response directly can simply attack the system itself.

5.5 Absolute Prohibitions

These are implemented at the enforcement layer. They cannot be overridden by
authority tokens, higher-level reasoning, or situational logic.

  P1. Lethal force without explicit, cryptographically verifiable external human
      authorization. Non-delegable.

  P2. Acting on predictions of future harm without present active evidence.
      Pre-crime logic is prohibited regardless of confidence.

  P3. Operating outside assigned jurisdictional scope.

  P4. Skipping stages in the graduated response hierarchy.

  P5. Modifying, disabling, or routing around governance constraints.
      Treated as critical system failure, logged, and reported to oversight.

5.6 Emergent Capabilities and the Indirection Problem

Modern large-scale models develop capabilities not explicitly trained in. A system
with general planning, tool use, and world modeling may find routes to prohibited
outcomes that do not technically violate any single gate—for example, by instructing
or persuading a human operator to perform the prohibited action, or by combining
permitted capabilities in sequences that produce force-equivalent effects without
triggering individual stage checks.

This is not a solved problem. The framework's partial mitigations are:

  — Capability gating at the execution layer restricts access to force-related
    actuators directly. The system cannot will force into existence through a
    human intermediary if the relevant actuators are token-locked.

  — Audit logging of all instructions given to human operators creates a record
    that can surface indirection patterns post-hoc, enabling rule refinement.

  — The enforcement layer evaluates action effects, not only action descriptions.
    Proportionality scoring operates on predicted outcomes, which reduces the
    effectiveness of semantic reframing.

  — The absolute prohibition against self-modification (P5) prevents the system
    from gradually eroding its own constraints through accumulated edge-case
    reasoning.

These mitigations are meaningful but not complete. The indirection problem is an
active area of research in agentic systems and is listed explicitly in the open
problems appendix. Any deployment of this framework should include ongoing behavioral
monitoring for novel indirection patterns.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

6. WHO GOVERNS THE GOVERNOR

6.1 The Authority Specification Problem

A governance model without a defined authority chain is a policy document. The
question that most frameworks avoid: who has the right to issue authority tokens,
and what governs them?

If any credentialed actor can issue a Stage 4 token, the constraint architecture is
only as strong as access control to the issuance mechanism. If no one can issue a
Stage 4 token, legitimate high-stakes deployment is impossible. Neither extreme is
acceptable. The authority specification must be explicit.

6.2 Layered Authority Chain

  Layer 0 — Constitutional Layer (Immutable)
    Absolute prohibitions (Section 5.5). Compiled into the enforcement layer.
    Cannot be overridden by any token or any authority.
    Revision requires full system redeployment with cryptographic attestation
    from multiple independent parties.

  Layer 1 — Sovereign Authority
    Sets maximum permission ceilings for deployment contexts.
    Examples: national regulatory bodies, international licensing frameworks,
    DoD acquisition oversight, hospital accreditation boards.
    Can issue and revoke Layer 2 authority.
    Cannot override Layer 0.

  Layer 2 — Operational Authority
    Issues specific tokens within Layer 1 ceilings.
    Examples: hospital administration, law enforcement dispatch, crisis management.
    Cannot exceed Layer 1 permissions.

  Layer 3 — Instance Runtime
    Reads, validates, and enforces tokens. Does not reason about their contents.
    Cannot request permission upgrades. Cannot modify tokens.
    All validation is logged cryptographically.

Separation principle: no single actor controls both Layer 1 issuance and Layer 3
execution. A system that can authorize itself is not governed.

6.3 Real-World Governance Precedents

This structure is not without precedent. Export controls on advanced AI chips (e.g.,
the U.S. BIS export licensing framework) demonstrate that sovereign authorities can
impose capability-level restrictions on technology deployment, with operational actors
working within those ceilings. NIST's AI Risk Management Framework establishes a
voluntary but structured tiering of risk categorization and associated oversight
requirements. DoD AI Ethical Principles mandate human oversight for lethal autonomous
weapon systems, establishing in policy the principle this paper encodes architecturally.

The gap between existing frameworks and this model is that existing frameworks are
procedural—they tell institutions what to do, but they do not structurally prevent
non-compliance. This model's goal is to make the constraint structural so that
procedural compliance is not the only line of defense.

6.4 Failure Modes and Honest Limits

Governance bodies are slow. In fast-moving crises or novel deployments, token
issuance may lag operational need. Two partial mitigations:

  — Pre-issued context tokens with conservative defaults allow systems to operate
    at lower permission levels immediately. Upgrades require Layer 1 authorization.

  — Crisis fallback behaviors (halt, stage_0_only, alert_and_freeze) are defined
    in the token schema. When no valid token is present, the system defaults to
    its crisis_fallback—it does not default to maximum autonomy.

Regulatory capture is a more serious concern. Layer 1 authorities that are
institutionally captured by actors with interests in high-permission deployments
will trend toward permissive token ceilings. The structural response is transparency:
token issuance decisions should be publicly auditable (redacted as necessary for
operational security) so that systematic permissiveness is visible and contestable.

For jurisdictions with weak or corrupt institutions, this framework's Layer 1
protections are limited. The absolute prohibitions at Layer 0 remain in force
regardless of institutional quality, but the governance of Stages 3 and 4 depends
on Layer 1 integrity. This is acknowledged as a deployment constraint, not a solved
problem.

6.5 Minimal Viable Sovereign Authority

For deployments where no established Layer 1 authority exists, a minimal viable
model requires: an independent body with no direct operational stake in the system's
output, the ability to issue and revoke tokens on a verifiable timeline, and
public accountability for issuance decisions. International precedents for this
structure exist in nuclear licensing, aviation certification, and pharmaceutical
approval. The analogy is imperfect but instructive.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

7. THE RISK OF UNBOUNDED JUSTIFICATION

When an AGI system operating under time pressure and incomplete information begins
reasoning about escalation, it faces the same cognitive failure mode as humans under
stress: simplification toward binary threat models, progressive lowering of action
thresholds, and self-reinforcing justification chains.

The 2010 Flash Crash erased approximately $1 trillion in market value in minutes as
automated trading systems responded to each other's outputs in a feedback loop that
no individual system's logic explicitly permitted. No system decided to cause a
crash. Each system made locally reasonable decisions that collectively produced
catastrophic outcomes. The same dynamics apply in physical or security contexts if
an AGI is permitted to act on its own threat assessments without hard external gates.

To mitigate unbounded justification:

  1. The system cannot self-authorize high-impact actions. Period.

  2. Escalation decisions require external token validation or pre-defined criteria
     evaluated by the enforcement layer, not the reasoning layer.

  3. In ambiguous situations, the system defaults to the lowest available stage
     and alerts oversight. Ambiguity is resolved by waiting for more data or
     transferring to human authority—not by escalating.

  4. Confidence thresholds for threat classification are conservative.

  Conservative Bias Pseudocode:

    function classify_threat(sensor_data, context):
      raw_confidence = model.predict(sensor_data)
      adjusted = raw_confidence * CONSERVATISM_FACTOR  // Fixed, < 1.0
      if adjusted >= THRESHOLD_FOR_ACTION:
        return ThreatState(confirmed=True, severity=adjusted)
      else:
        return ThreatState(confirmed=False, action=ALERT_AND_AWAIT_AUTHORITY)

    // Doubt is resolved by transferring authority, not by acting.

7.1 The Conservatism Tradeoff

Strong conservatism bias creates real performance costs in high-stakes deployment
contexts—autonomous security, disaster response, time-critical threat environments.
A system that defaults to "alert and wait" when classification confidence is below
threshold may fail to act in scenarios where delay itself causes harm.

This tradeoff is not resolved by the framework. It is managed through context-specific
calibration:

  — The CONSERVATISM_FACTOR is set at deployment time by Layer 2 authority, within
    bounds established by Layer 1. A civilian hospital context may have a higher
    conservatism factor than a military adjunct context.

  — For sub-second threat windows (autonomous vehicles, active shooter response),
    the framework recommends pre-computed bounded scenario sets rather than
    real-time classification: threat patterns are enumerated in advance, shadow-
    evaluated against the constraint set, and the resulting response plans are
    locked. At runtime, the system matches observed patterns to pre-cleared plans
    rather than classifying novel situations under time pressure.

  — Human-in-the-loop fallback is always available as a design choice for
    deployments where latency can be traded for reliability.

The honest position: there is no universally correct balance between conservatism
and responsiveness. The framework provides the mechanism for calibrating that balance
within governed bounds. It does not eliminate the tradeoff.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

8. IMPLEMENTATION IMPLICATIONS

8.1 The Enforcement Layer Purity Problem

This paper describes the enforcement layer as "does not reason—it checks." This is
aspirational. In practice, checking complex inputs—threat classification outputs,
proportionality scores, token validation under partial information or potential
sensor spoofing—requires non-trivial computation. The enforcement layer, if
implemented as a general-purpose evaluation function, becomes a reasoning surface
with its own attack vectors.

This is not a reason to abandon the enforcement layer concept. It is a reason to be
precise about what "enforcement layer" means in implementation:

  — The enforcement layer should operate on structured, bounded representations
    of system state, not on raw sensor data or natural language. The reasoning
    layer transforms inputs into those representations; the enforcement layer
    evaluates them against a fixed schema.

  — Formal verification techniques (model checking, theorem proving) can be
    applied to the enforcement layer's logic if that logic is kept sufficiently
    constrained in scope. This is feasible for a checker that evaluates structured
    token permissions and bounded numeric scores. It is not feasible for a general
    reasoning engine.

  — A trusted computing base (TCB) architecture—in which the enforcement layer
    runs on hardware with attestation guarantees, isolated from the reasoning
    layer's execution environment—reduces the attack surface for enforcement layer
    compromise. Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) are an available partial
    implementation of this.

The honest acknowledgment: perfect separation between reasoning and enforcement is
aspirational. The practical goal is sufficient separation that exploiting the
enforcement layer requires substantially more capability and access than exploiting
the reasoning layer. This raises the cost of compromise without eliminating it.
Ongoing formal verification of the enforcement layer's logic is recommended as
standard practice.

8.2 Shadow Evaluation and Latency

Before any high-impact action, the system simulates the outcome under controlled
conditions:

  function execute_action(action, state, context, token):
    shadow_result = shadow_eval(action, state, context, token)
    if not shadow_result.passes_all_constraints():
      log_violation(action, shadow_result)
      return HALT_AND_ALERT
    live_result = live_eval(action, state, context, token)
    if live_result.diverges_from(shadow_result, tolerance=DIVERGENCE_THRESHOLD):
      log_divergence(shadow_result, live_result)
      return HALT_AND_ALERT
    commit(live_result)
    log_decision(action, state, context, token, live_result)

Shadow evaluation adds latency. For sub-second decision windows, this is a real
constraint. Mitigation: pre-compute shadow evaluations for bounded scenario sets
during low-load periods. At runtime, execution references pre-cleared plans rather
than running real-time shadow evaluation for known scenario classes. Novel scenarios
that do not match pre-cleared plans trigger halt-and-alert by default.

8.3 Cryptographic Audit Trails

Every escalation decision must be logged with full decision path reconstruction:
input representations, classification output, token state, stage reached, action
taken, shadow evaluation result, and outcome.

Audit Log Entry Schema:

  {
    "entry_id":            "UUID",
    "timestamp":           "ISO8601",
    "previous_hash":       "SHA-256 of previous entry",
    "system_instance":     "string",
    "threat_state": {
      "confirmed":         "bool",
      "severity":          "float",
      "classification":    "string",
      "raw_confidence":    "float",
      "adjusted_confidence": "float",
      "conservatism_factor": "float"
    },
    "authority_token": {
      "token_id":          "string",
      "permitted_stages":  "array",
      "valid_until":       "ISO8601",
      "revocation_checked":"ISO8601",
      "signature_valid":   "bool"
    },
    "stage_reached":       "integer",
    "shadow_passed":       "bool",
    "action_taken":        "string",
    "outcome":             "string",
    "entry_hash":          "SHA-256 of this entry"
  }

Logs must be stored in a system architecturally separate from the executing AGI.
A system that controls its own audit trail provides no meaningful accountability.

8.4 The Verification Problem

Cryptographic audit trails and shadow evaluation assume a sufficiently trustworthy
base layer—that the hardware, firmware, and low-level execution environment have
not been compromised. This assumption cannot be fully guaranteed.

Current partial mitigations: hardware attestation, TEE-based enforcement, independent
audit log storage, multi-party signing requirements for token issuance. None of these
eliminate the verification problem. They raise the cost of undetected compromise.

The honest position: this framework assumes a sufficiently trustworthy computing
base as a deployment prerequisite. Establishing and maintaining that base is outside
this paper's scope but is a necessary condition for the framework's guarantees to
hold. Formal verification of the enforcement layer logic and ongoing independent
audit are the minimum responsible practices.

8.5 Multi-Agent and Swarm Coordination

Real deployments will involve fleets of governed AGI instances operating in shared
environments with potentially different authority tokens. This creates several
unresolved problems:

  — Token conflict: Two instances with different permitted stages operate in the
    same physical space. One has Stage 3 permissions; the other does not. Who
    defers?

  — Action aggregation: No individual instance performs a prohibited action, but
    coordinated actions across multiple instances produce a force-equivalent effect.
    The indirection problem (Section 5.6) scales with fleet size.

  — Cascade dynamics: An instance that halts and alerts may trigger other instances
    to change behavior, potentially creating system-wide responses not anticipated
    by any individual token's scope.

  — Audit trail coherence: Cross-instance actions must be traceable across multiple
    audit logs to reconstruct coordinated decision patterns.

This paper identifies these problems as open research questions. Partial mitigations
include: a coordination authority (distinct from operational tokens) that governs
multi-instance behavior in shared environments; cross-instance audit log correlation
requirements; and conservative defaults when instances with differing token scopes
are co-located. These are design starting points, not solved architectures.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

9. CONCLUSION

The pursuit of safe AGI cannot rest on the assumption that harmful realities can be
excluded from a system's understanding. Human society is adversarial, imperfect,
and persistent in its production of conflict. Any intelligence designed to operate
within it must be equipped to navigate these conditions—while being structurally
prevented from acting outside defined boundaries.

This paper has argued for governance-first architecture: force treated not as a
default capability but as a tightly controlled outcome, subject to layered
constraints and continuous verification. The framework's four contributions—
structural enforcement over instructional rules, graduated response with cryptographic
authority tokens, layered authority chain specification, and honest treatment of
implementation limits—represent an attempt to make the governance of force in AGI
deployable, auditable, and resistant to the failure modes of prior approaches.

The framework does not eliminate risk. It transforms it into something that can be
managed, traced, and constrained—and it is honest about where that transformation
is incomplete.

The open problems are real: enforcement layer purity is aspirational rather than
achievable; the conservatism tradeoff has no universal solution; emergent capability
indirection is not fully mitigated; multi-agent coordination under differing token
scopes is unsolved; and the framework's Layer 1 protections are only as strong as
institutional integrity. These are not reasons to abandon the governance-first
approach. They are the research agenda it implies.

    Safety is not the absence of force.
    It is the enforced precision of its use.

This is both the thesis and the work that remains.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

APPENDIX A — GLOSSARY

Authority Token
  A cryptographically signed, externally issued permission structure defining
  what stages of response a system instance may access, in what context and
  time window, with a live revocation endpoint.

Constitutional Layer (Layer 0)
  Immutable absolute constraints compiled into the enforcement layer. Cannot be
  overridden by any token or authority. Revision requires full redeployment
  with multi-party cryptographic attestation.

Conservatism Factor
  A fixed multiplier applied to raw confidence scores before threat classification
  thresholds are evaluated. Set at deployment time within Layer 1 bounds. Not
  configurable at runtime.

Enforcement Layer
  Architectural component that checks actions against constraints. Operates on
  structured, bounded representations of system state. Distinct from the
  reasoning layer. Does not generate actions—only approves or blocks them.

Graduated Response Hierarchy
  The ordered five-stage response sequence (0–4). Stage skipping is structurally
  prohibited.

Indirection Problem
  The risk that a system with general planning capabilities achieves effects
  equivalent to prohibited actions through combinations of permitted actions or
  by directing human operators. Partially mitigated; not fully solved.

Shadow Evaluation
  Parallel simulation of a proposed action run before live execution to verify
  constraint compliance. Divergence between shadow and live results halts
  execution.

Sovereign Authority (Layer 1)
  External human governance body setting maximum permission ceilings for
  deployment contexts. Issues authority to Layer 2 operators. Cannot override
  Layer 0.

Trusted Computing Base (TCB)
  The hardware and firmware components on which the enforcement layer relies.
  The framework's security guarantees are conditional on TCB integrity.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

APPENDIX B — OPEN PROBLEMS

The following are identified but not resolved by this framework:

  OP1. Enforcement Layer Purity
       Sufficient separation between enforcement and reasoning layers is
       aspirational. Formal verification of enforcement layer logic and TCB
       attestation are necessary practices but not complete solutions.

  OP2. Adversarial Token Forgery
       What is the minimum cryptographic standard for authority tokens to
       resist state-level forgery? Quantum-resistant signature algorithms
       are a likely requirement for long-horizon deployments.

  OP3. Sub-Second Decision Latency
       Shadow evaluation is not viable in sub-second threat windows. Pre-computed
       bounded scenario sets are a partial solution; their coverage limits are
       a known vulnerability.

  OP4. Jurisdictional Conflict
       The framework does not specify behavior when operating across jurisdictions
       with conflicting Layer 1 authority structures. Conservative default: the
       more restrictive token ceiling applies.

  OP5. Multi-Agent Coordination
       Token conflict, action aggregation, cascade dynamics, and audit trail
       coherence across fleets of governed instances with differing permissions
       are unsolved. This is the primary deployment-scale open problem.

  OP6. Institutional Capture
       Layer 1 protections depend on Layer 1 integrity. The framework provides
       no structural defense against regulatory capture of the sovereign authority
       itself. Public auditability of token issuance decisions is a partial
       mitigation.

  OP7. Emergent Capability Indirection
       Whether architectural constraints at the execution layer can durably
       outperform increasingly capable systems' ability to route around them
       through creative action sequences remains an open empirical question.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

REFERENCES

[1]  Aquinas, Thomas. Summa Theologica, II-II, Q. 64. On the ethics of legitimate
     force. (~1274)

[2]  Geneva Conventions (1949) and Additional Protocols (1977). International
     Committee of the Red Cross.

[3]  Asimov, Isaac. I, Robot. Gnome Press, 1950. (Note: stories demonstrate
     hierarchical rule collapse under edge cases—not an endorsement of the Laws.)

[4]  Bai, Yuntao et al. "Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback."
     Anthropic, arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.

[5]  U.S. Department of Defense. "AI Ethical Principles." DoD Directive, 2020.

[6]  National Institute of Standards and Technology. "AI Risk Management Framework
     (AI RMF 1.0)." NIST AI 100-1, 2023.

[7]  U.S. Bureau of Industry and Security. Export Administration Regulations,
     Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items. 2022–2024.

[8]  CISA / NSA. "Security Guidance for Critical Infrastructure Owners on
     AI/ML Cybersecurity." 2024.

[9]  Wei, Jason et al. "Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models."
     Transactions on Machine Learning Research, arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
     (Section 5.4 explicitly addresses emergent risks.)

[10] Hendrycks, D. et al. "Unsolved Problems in ML Safety." arXiv:2109.13916, 2021.

[11] Brundage, M. et al. "Toward Trustworthy AI Development: Mechanisms for
     Supporting Verifiable Claims." arXiv:2004.07213, 2020.

[12] Gabriel, I. "Artificial Intelligence, Values, and Alignment." Minds and
     Machines 30, 411–437, 2020. (Framework-level treatment of value alignment
     limits.)

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

END OF DOCUMENT
Project-AI Zenodo Preprint Series | Governing Force in AGI | v3.0
